---
layout: post
title: QMK chronicles part 1 - Unbricking my Pro Micro
tags: [avr, qmk, firmware, keyboard, despair]
---

[QMK](https://docs.qmk.fm/#/) is an extraordinarily versatile open source customizable firmware for input devices such as custom keyboards, mice, etc. Unfortunately, I did not get to use any of it in this blog post because I accidentally corrupted my firmware, so that's what we'll be talking about today.

For context, I am an absolute firmware newb and have not done AVR programming before, though I have interfaced with chips as blackboxes before such as with hobby electronics or breadboarding chips together.

### Environment

- OSX 10.14.6
- Keyboard controllers: 5V Pro Micro, ATmega32u4 chip
- Keyboard board: [`crkbd`](https://github.com/foostan/crkbd)

*My "legacy" OSX 10.13 appeared to have some compatibility issues with running QMK, so I waited until recently when I was willing to upgrade to 10.14 (I've been avoiding 10.15 for developer incompatibility reasons).*

*In the meantime, I've been tweaking my keymap with [VIA](https://caniusevia.com/), an extremely user friendly piece of software that doesn't have as many features as QMK but still lets you do quite a bit of customization including basic [Mod-Tap](https://thomasbaart.nl/2018/12/09/qmk-basics-tap-and-hold-actions/) for multiplexing tapped and held keycodes.*

# So, I bricked my controller

I tried reflashing a default firmware build onto my controllers with QMK Toolbox and instantaneously bricked the right one. While the left Pro Micro was still flashable, the right could not be flashed over USB and also stopped functioning as a keyboard.

## Debug checklist 

- What functions still appear to work? (Typing, screen, underglow LEDs, power indicator LED)
- Can I enter bootloader mode by pressing the Reset button on the `crkbd` while the controller is socketed?
- Can I enter bootloader mode by physically shorting the RST and GND pins on the unsocketed controller?
- Is the result the same if I physically swap the Pro Micros in their sockets?
- Verify with a multimeter that the reset button on the `crkbd` has a connection.

## Hypothesis: the bootloader is corrupted.

It became clear that, for whatever reason, I was not going to be able to write to this board directly over USB any more.

I received a recommendation to use an ISP programmer to reflash the bootloader on the Pro Micro. Digging through mine and my housemates' hobby electronics piles for plausible ISP programming hardware, we came up with a very old Sparkfun Bus Pirate and an Arduino Mega 2560. For some reason I wasn't able to get the Bus Pirate to work, and ended up using the Arduino instead.

# Reflashing it with an ISP programmer

My rough understanding of an ISP programmer is that it's a device which lets you re-flash the firmware on chips which support ISP.

Hobby electronics platforms such as Arduino obscure this by shipping with a firmware which allows you to load special Arduino code over USB without any specialized hardware, and run that code without changing the firmware.

## Materials

```
brew install avr-gcc avrdude lsusb
```
(`avr-gcc` takes a while)

**An ISP programming device.** This can be a specialized board, or if you have an Arduino with convenient headers lying around, you can also reflash it to function as an ISP programmer.

**A USB *data* cable.** I accidentally wasted hours struggling with my board before realizing I had picked up a power-only cable.

If you are using an Arduino as the ISP programmer, you will also need a 10uF capacitor. However, I was only able to find a 1uF capacitor and it seemed to work just fine.

A breadboard and several jumper cables are also handy.

## Which bootloader?

While I was sorting all this out, Drashna (an extremely helpful core QMK contributor) recommended that, if I was going to be reflashing my bootloader anyway, I should switch from `Caterina`, the default Pro Micro bootloader, to `DFU`. [keeb.io summary](https://docs-gitbook.keeb.io/docs/dfu-on-pro-micro) of [Drashna's full DFU vs Caterina spiel](https://www.reddit.com/r/olkb/comments/8sxgzb/replace_pro_micro_bootloader_with_qmk_dfu/).

I downloaded the [Atmel DFU bootloader for ATmega32U4](https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware/blob/master/util/bootloader_atmega32u4_1.0.0.hex) from the QMK Github repo.

## ISP programming a Pro Micro Atmega32u4

- [Pro Micro pinout](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/pro-micro--fio-v3-hookup-guide/hardware-overview-pro-micro)
- [QMK ISP flashing guide](https://docs.qmk.fm/#/isp_flashing_guide?id=isp-flashing-guide)

## ISP programmer attempt 1: Sparkfun Bus Pirate

- [Bus Pirate pin header guide](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/bus-pirate-v36a-hookup-guide/all)
- [Bus Pirate AVR programming](http://dangerousprototypes.com/docs/Bus_Pirate_AVR_Programming)

This was how I interpreted the wiring recommendation. There are multiple versions of this board, and sometimes the header can apparently be flipped, so make absolutely sure that the wires are emerging in the order you expect.
```
buspirate +5V <> promicro VCC
buspirate GND <> promicro GND
buspirate CS <> promicro RST
buspirate CLK <> promicro 15 (SCLK)
buspirate MISO <> promicro 14 (MISO)
buspirate MOSI <> promicro 16 (MOSI)
```

## ISP programmer attempt 2: Arduino

Things are going to get a bit confusing with multiple Arduinos being used for different purposes. I will refer to one of them as the ISP programmer, and the keyboard microcontroller which you are attempting to reflash with it as the "target board".

First, [turn your extra Arduino into an ISP programmer](https://www.arduino.cc/en/pmwiki.php?n=Tutorial/ArduinoISP) using the appropriate arduino.cc instructions for your board. Here is an additional [Sparkfun guide on using an Arduino to burn a new bootloader](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/installing-an-arduino-bootloader/all). It can also help to dig up the pinouts for both your Arduino-as-ISP and your target board.

### Safety emphases

The **capacitor** needs to be wired between RST and GND in the POWER section *after* you have turned the Arduino into an ISP programmer, but *before* you wire it to your target board.

For safety, keep the power unplugged while you are in the process of wiring the board, and any time you are plugging/unplugging the target board.

### Wiring Arduino Mega 2560 as ISP programmer, to atmega32u4 as target
```
mega +5V <> atmega32u4 VCC
mega GND <> atmega32u4 GND
mega 50 (MISO) <> atmega32u4 14 (MISO)
mega 51 (MOSI) <> atmega32u4 16 (MOSI)
mega 52 (SCK) <> atmega32u4 15 (SCLK)
mega 53 (SS) <> atmega32u4 RST
```

Some guides say to wire pin 10 on the mega to RST on the promicro, but I found that only 53 worked for me? Unfortunately, I don't have an explanation for this.

## It's `avrdude` time

### Identify your port

I did `ls /dev/cu*` before and after plugging in the USB to find out my port name. Mine ended up being `/dev/cu.usbmodem14101`, but yours will probably be different.

### Sanity check that the devices are talking

Sanity check that you can talk to your board with `avrdude -c <programmer type> -P <USB port name> -p <target board name>`. You also might need to set your baud rate with `-b`. My output ended up looking like this:

```
$ avrdude -c arduino -P /dev/cu.usbmodem14101 -p ATmega32u4 -b 19200

avrdude: AVR device initialized and ready to accept instructions

Reading | ################################################## | 100% 0.01s

avrdude: Device signature = 0x1e9587 (probably m32u4)

avrdude: safemode: Fuses OK (E:CB, H:D8, L:FF)

avrdude done.  Thank you.
```

### Are your fuse bits correct?

If you are changing bootloaders, you will need to change the fuses too. 

Fuse bits are stored configuration bits for AVR microcontrollers which control low-level settings, such as the internal oscillator multiplier. See [AVR fuse bits explained - Hackaday](https://hackaday.com/2012/08/30/avr-fuse-bits-explained/).

You can permanently brick a board by setting the fuse bits incorrectly, so make absolutely sure you have picked the correct bits before doing this, and then triple check that they are typed correctly. I got the appropriate fuse bits from [this section of the QMK ISP flashing guide](https://docs.qmk.fm/#/isp_flashing_guide?id=advanced-changing-fuses).

For a DFU bootloader on a 5V 16MHz atmega32u4, I added `-U lfuse:w:0x5E:m -U hfuse:w:0xD9:m -U efuse:w:0xC3:m` to my `avrdude` command. Again, these are *not* going to be the same for some other combination of bootloader and chip, so triple check that you have the right ones.

### Final flashing process

In summary, to fix the messed up bootloader on my 5V 16MHz atmega32u4 using an Arduino as an ISP programmer, and replace it with a DFU bootloader, I did this. *(Do NOT copy these exact commands for any other combination of chips/bootloaders -- you will probably brick your hardware.)*

1. Set the correct fuse bits for a DFU bootloader on this chip.
```
avrdude -c arduino -P /dev/cu.usbmodem14101 -p ATmega32u4 -b 19200 -v -e -U lfuse:w:0x5E:m -U hfuse:w:0x99:m -U efuse:w:0xC3:m
```

2. Flash with DFU bootloader `.hex` file (which I downloaded from QMK).
```
avrdude -c arduino -P /dev/cu.usbmodem14101 -p ATmega32u4 -b 19200 -v -e -U flash:w:bootloader_atmega32u4_1.0.0.hex
```

3. Flash with compiled firmware (`.hex` file) of choice.
```
avrdude -c arduino -P /dev/cu.usbmodem14101 -p ATmega32u4 -b 19200 -v -e -U flash:w:crkbd_rev1_via.hex
```

# Conclusion

I learned a lot about AVR programming today; mostly that I find it stressful and despairing.

This restored me to a base state where I was able to use my keyboard as a keyboard again, but, strangely, did not get me into a state where I could reflash QMK; in fact, I re-bricked my Pro Micro again the exact same way when trying to use `qmk` CLI, and had to fix it again with the ISP programmer.

Tune in next time to see if I will ever manage to attain QMK ultimate power, or if I will be trapped indefinitely on VIA, weeping forlornly into my rat's nest of jumper cables and firmware manuals.
