---
layout: post
title: Pyodide - first impressions and basic profiling
tags: [web, scientific-computing, wasm]
---

At Creative Coding last week, I made [`ghostlines`](https://rfong.github.io/creative-coding/ghostlines/), a moody little sketch where I decided to draw an awful lot of vectors for fun on a canvas calculated off some live image manipulation from a camera feed. Unexpectedly, it was slower than a sloth, which was a good excuse to revisit [WebAssembly (Wasm)](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2017/02/a-cartoon-intro-to-webassembly/) for performance, and because why not.

I consulted [this excellently curated list](https://github.com/appcypher/awesome-wasm-langs) of Wasm-ready langs to pick out something with performant matrix manipulation capabilities, and decided to try out [Pyodide](https://pyodide.org/), which is Python plus scientific computing libraries compiled to Wasm. In other words, seems like a good way to do client-side matrix manipulation or stats without perishing from boredom watching Javascript seize up.

Here are some first impressions and a quick benchmark on some basic image manipulation.

# First thoughts

Pyodide's setup was sleek and fantastic, even *without* comparing it to my precarious [first brush with Wasm](https://github.com/rfong/wasm-tinygo-hello), which involved piecing together several dependency chains from hell to rebuild [TinyGo](https://github.com/tinygo-org/tinygo) on my decrepit machine. Pyodide's [examples](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/quickstart.html) worked out of the box for me, which is an exceedingly rare delight in modern web development.

## Type conversion

It is not 100% magic, but it's pretty close. You need to be aware of some [type translation](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/type-conversions.html) conventions between Javascript and Pyodide.

JS values passed to Pyodide (as with `pyodide.globals.set`) will be inside a [`JsProxy` wrapper](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/api/python-api.html#pyodide.JsProxy). You can use `to_py()` to have Pyodide attempt to convert it to a native Python object, and there's even built-in support for Javascript promise handling, which I didn't try but which looks pretty slick.

I'm also doing some things like casting JS values to `Uint8`, not because it's particularly tricky for Python to convert an `int32` to a `uint8`, but because I assume it will make it easier for the machine architecture underlying Wasm to handle the data more efficiently.


# Let's benchmark!

I started doing some basic profiling, but immediately saw that repeated data was probably getting cached because all runs after the first run went about 100x faster. So I needed some randomized "image" data.

## `numpy` refresher/trivia

I haven't used `numpy` much and not in a pretty long time, so I had to learn a lot of basics along the way.

- `arr.size` gets the total number of points in a `numpy` matrix.
- To generate matrices full of random values, you can use `numpy.random.random_sample` to populate with values in the `[0.0,1.0)` half-interval, or `numpy.random.randint` to populate with integers.
- `numpy.concatenate` glues together matrices along a specified axis. Other different nuanced methods to join together matrices are `stack`, `hstack`, and `vstack`.

## Randomized "image" data

I built a quick random RGBA image-data generator in both JS (because that's where the image data will be coming from) with `lodash` (for my sanity), and in Python (to simplify Python-side code debugging, but not to be used in the end result). To strike a balance of sanity and realism, I used an image size of 800x600.

First pass with vanilla python list comprehensions was hilariously slow; to be `%.1f` precise, about 4.5 seconds.

{% highlight python %}{% raw %}
[
  [random.randint(0, 255) for _ in range(3)] + [255]
  for _ in range(height*width)  # each pixel
]
{% endraw %}{% endhighlight %}

Then I found `np.random.randint` and matrix concatenation and it went down to 0.07 seconds. I'm not being precise here, I just need it to be not-slow enough for me to not-weep while iterating.

{% highlight python %}{% raw %}
np.concatenate(
  ( # Generate rand RGB data
    np.random.randint(255, size=(height*width, 3)),
    # Alpha = 255
    255 * np.ones((height*width, 1)),
  ), axis=1,  # Concatenate them column-wise
)
{% endraw %}{% endhighlight %}

In emulation of the way image data is shaped when you yoink it out of an HTML canvas context, the random "image" on the JS side was formatted as a 1D array of unsigned 8-bit integers, representing a flat, unchunked list of RGBA values.

{% highlight javascript %}{% raw %}
new Uint8Array(_.flatten(_.map(_.range(height), () =>
  // each row
  _.flatten(_.map(_.range(width), () =>
    // For each pixel, give random RGB values with A=hi
    _.map(_.range(3), () => _.random(0,255)).concat(255)
  ))
)));
{% endraw %}{% endhighlight %}

## Actually benchmarking now

The current canonical way to time code execution in JS is `performance.now()`.

I figured it would almost definitely be faster to chuck the image directly into Python and do all computing there, but since I'm not very familiar with the architectures of either Pyodide or Wasm, I didn't want to make any assumptions.

For example, I figured it would probably be faster to (1) strip the image to greyscale on the Python side, but I didn't want to rule out the possibility that (2) the performance hit from stripping to greyscale on the JS side might somehow be outweighed by the performance gain from translating 4x less data than a full RGBA image.

(1) Benchmark: pass random image data from JS to Pyodide via `await pyodide.globals.set`, then use `await pyodide.runPython` to nicely ask Pyodide to instantiate my Image class and greyscale it:
```
ran "strip RGB in Py" 10 times
avg: 1.42 ms
max: 7.10 ms
min: 0.30 ms
```

(2) Benchmark: strip the random image data to greyscale on the JS side, then pass it to Pyodide and instantiate an Image out of it.
```
ran "strip RGB in JS then pass to Py" 10 times
avg: 1767.25 ms
max: 2753.60 ms
min: 1239.00 ms
```

Doubts banished, hypothesis validated! This is a massive enough difference I'm not going to even bother benchmarking other differences, I'm just going to chuck the RGBA image straight into Pyodide and do all computation there. More soon!
